when I was a child I knew I had
superpowers that's right I thought I was
absolutely amazing
because I could understand and relate to
the feelings of brown people like my
grandfather a conservative Muslim guy
and also I could understand my Afghan
mother my Pakistani father not so
religious but laid-back fairly liberal
and of course I could understand and
relate to the feelings of white people
the white Norwegians of my country
you know white brown whatever I loved
them all
I understood them all even if they
didn't always understand each other they
were all my people my father though was
always really worried he kept saying
that even with the best education I was
not going to get a fair shake I would
still face discrimination according to
him and that the only way to be accepted
by white people would be to become
famous now mind you he had this
conversation with me when I was seven
years old so so while I'm seven years
old he said look so it's either gotta be
sports or it's gotta be music he didn't
know anything about sports bless him so
it was music so when I was seven years
old he gathered all my toys all my dolls
and he threw them all away in exchange
he gave me a crappy little Casio
keyboard and yeah and singing lessons
and he forced me basically to practice
for hours and hours every single day
very quickly he also had me performing
for larger and larger audiences and
bizarrely I became almost a kind of
poster child for Norwegian
multiculturalism I felt very proud of
course because even the newspapers at
this point were starting to write nice
things about brown people so I could
feel that my superpower was growing so
when I was 12 years old walking home
from school I took a little detour
because I wanted to buy my favorite
sweets called salty feet I
they sound kind of awful but I
absolutely love them they're basically
these little salty liquorice bits in the
shape of feet and now that I say it out
loud I realize how kind of terrible but
be that as it may I absolutely love them
so on my way into the store
there was this grown white guy in the
doorway blocking my way so I try to walk
around him and as I as I did that he
stopped me and he was staring at me and
he spit in my face and he said get out
of my way your little black [ __ ] your
little [ __ ] [ __ ] get out of my go back
home where you came from I was
absolutely horrified I was staring at
him I was too afraid to wipe the spit
off my face even as it was mixing with
my tears I remember looking around
hoping that any minute now a grown up is
going to come and make this guy stop but
instead people kept hurrying past me and
pretended not to see me
I was very confused because I was
thinking well my white people come on
where are they what's going on how come
they're not coming and rescuing me so
needless to say I didn't buy the sweets
I just ran home as fast as I could
things were still okay though I thought
as time went on the more successful I
became I eventually started also
attracting harassment from brown people
some men in my parents community felt
that it was unacceptable and
dishonorable for a woman to be involved
in music and to be so present in the
media so very quickly I was starting to
become attacked at my own concerts I
remember one of the concerts I was
onstage I leaned in to the audience and
the last thing I see is a young brown
face and the next thing I know is some
sort of chemical is thrown in my eyes
and I remember I couldn't really see and
my eyes were watering but I kept singing
anyway I was spit in the face in the
streets of Oslo this time by brown men
they
and try to kidnap me at one point the
death threats were endless I remember
one older bearded guy stopped me in the
street one time and he said the reason I
hate you so much is because you make our
daughters think they can do whatever
they want a younger guy warned me to
watch my back he said music is
unassuming and the job of [ __ ] and if
you keep this up you are going to be
raped and your stomach will be cut out
so that another [ __ ] like you will not
be born again I was so confused I
couldn't understand what was going on my
brown people now starting to treat me
like this
how come instead of bridging the worlds
the two worlds I felt like I was falling
between my two worlds I suppose from me
spit was kryptonite so by the time I was
17 years old the death threats were
endless and the harassment was constant
it got so bad at one point my mother sat
me down and said look we can no longer
protect you we can no longer keep you
safe so you're gonna have to go so I
bought a one-way ticket to London I
packed my suitcase and I left my biggest
heartbreak at that point was that nobody
said anything I had a very public exit
from Norway my brown people my white
people nobody said anything nobody said
hold on this is wrong support this girl
protect this girl because she's one of
us nobody said that instead I felt like
you know at the airport on the baggage
carousel you have this different
suitcases going round and round and
there's always that one suitcase left at
the end the one that nobody wants the
one that nobody comes to claim I felt
like that I'd never felt so alone I'd
never felt so lost so after coming to
London I did eventually resume my music
career different place but unfortunately
the same old story I remember a message
sent to me saying that I was going to be
killed and that rivers of blood were
going to be they were going to flow and
that I was going to be raped many times
before I died by this point I have to
say I was actually getting used to
messages like
but what became different was that now
they started threatening my family so
once again I packed my suitcase
I left music and I moved to the US I'd
had enough
didn't one have anything to do with this
anymore and I was certainly not going to
be killed for something that wasn't even
my dream it was my father's choice so I
I kind of got lost I kind of fell apart
but I decided that what I wanted to do
is to spend the next however many years
of my life supporting young people and
to try to be there in some small way
whatever way that I could so I started
volunteering for various organizations
that were working with young Muslims
inside inside of Europe and to my
surprise what I found was so many of
these young people were suffering and
struggling they were facing so many
problems with their families and their
communities who seemed to care more
about their honor and the reputation and
the happiness and the lives of their own
kids I started feeling like maybe I
wasn't so alone maybe I wasn't so weird
maybe there are more of my people out
there the thing is what most people
don't understand is that there are so
many of us growing up in Europe who are
not free to be ourselves we're not
allowed to be who we are we we are not
free to marry or to be in relationships
with people that we choose we can't even
pick our own career this is the norm in
the Muslim heartlands of Europe even in
the freest societies in the world were
not free our lives our dreams our future
does not belong to us it belongs to our
parents and their community I found
endless stories of young people who are
lost to all of us who are invisible to
all of us but who are suffering and they
are suffering alone kids that we are
losing to forced marriages to honour
based violence and abuse so eventually I
realized after several years of working
these young people that I will not be
able to keep running I can't keep the
right I can't spend the rest of my life
being scared and hiding and that I'm
actually gonna have to do something and
I also realized that my silence our
silence allows abuse like this to
continue so I decided that I wanted to
put my childhood superpower to some use
by trying to make people on the
different sides of these issues
understand what it's like to be a young
person stuck between your family and
your country so I started making films
and I started telling these stories and
I also wanted people to understand the
deadly consequences of us not taking
these problems seriously so the first
film I made was about banaz she was a 17
year old Kurdish girl in London she was
obedient she did whatever her parents
wanted she tried to do everything right
she married some guy that her parents
chose for her even though he beat and
raped her constantly and when she tried
to go to her family for help they said
well you gotta go back and be a better
wife because they didn't want a divorce
daughter on their hands because of
course that would bring dishonor on the
family she was beaten so badly her ears
would bleed and when she finally left
and she found a young man that she chose
and she fell in love with the community
and the family found out and she
disappeared she was found three months
later she'd been stuffed into a suitcase
and buried underneath the house she had
been strangled she had been beaten to
death by three men three cousins on the
orders of her father and uncle the added
tragedy of bonuses story is that she had
gone to the police in England five times
asking for help telling them that she
was going to be killed by her family the
police didn't believe her so they didn't
do anything and the problem with this is
that not only are so many of our kids
facing these problems within their
families and within their there
these communities but they're also
meeting misunderstandings and advaithi
in the countries that they grow up in
when their than their own families
betray them they look to the rest of us
and when we don't understand we lose
them so you know while I was making this
film several people said to me well dear
you know this is just their culture this
is just what those people do to their
kids and we can't really interfere I can
assure you being murdered is not my
culture you know and surely people who
look like me young women who come from
backgrounds like me should be subject to
the same rights the same protections as
anybody else in our country why not so
for my next film I wanted to try and
understand why some of our young Muslim
kids in Europe are drawn to extremism
and violence but with that topic I also
recognize that I was going to have to
face my worst fear the brown men with
beards the same men that had been or
similar men to the ones that have
hounded me for most of my life men that
I've been afraid of most of my life men
that I've also deeply disliked for many
many years so I spent the next two years
interviewing convicted terrorists
jihadis and former extremists what I
already knew who was very obvious
already was that religion politics
Europe's colonial baggage also you know
Western foreign policy failures of
recent years were all a part of the
picture but when I was more interested
in finding out was what are the human
what are the personal reasons why some
of our young people are susceptible to
groups like this and what really
surprised me was that I found wounded
human beings instead of the monsters
that I was looking for that I was hoping
to find quite frankly because it would
have been very satisfying
I found broken people just like banas
I found that these young men were torn
apart from trying to bridge the gaps
between their families and the countries
that they were born in and what I also
learned is that extremist groups
terrorist groups are taking advantage of
these feelings of our young people and
channeling that cynically channeling
that towards violence come to us they
say reject both sides your family and
your country because they reject you for
your family their honor is more
important than you and for your country
a real Norwegian Brit or a French person
will always be white and never you
they're also promising our young people
the things that they crave significance
heroism a sense of belonging and purpose
a community that loves and accepts them
they make the powerless feel powerful
the invisible and the silent are finally
seen and heard this is what they're
doing for our young people
what are these groups doing this for our
young people and not us the thing is I'm
not trying to justify or excuse any of
the violence what I am trying to say is
that we have to understand why some of
our young people are attracted to this I
would like to also show you actually
these are childhood photos of some of
the guys in the film what really struck
me is that so many of them I never would
have thought this but so many of them
have absent or abusive fathers and
several of these young guys ended up
finding caring and compassionate father
figures within these extremist groups
I also found men brutalized by racist
violence but who found a way to stop
feeling like victims by becoming violent
themselves in fact I found something
to my horror that I recognized I found
the same feelings that I felt as a 17
year old as I fled from Norway the same
confusion the
same sorrow the same feeling of being
betrayed and not belonging to anyone
same feeling of being lost and torn
between cultures having said that I did
not choose destruction I chose to pick
up a camera instead of a gun and the
reason I did that is because of my
superpower I could see that
understanding is the answer instead of
violence seeing human beings with all
their virtues and all their flaws
instead of continuing the caricatures
the US and them the villains and victims
I'd also finally come to terms with the
fact that my two cultures didn't have to
be on a collision course but instead
became a space where I found my own
voice I stopped feeling like I had to
pick a side but this took me many many
years there are so many of our young
people today who are struggling with
these same issues and they're struggling
with this alone and this leaves them
open like wounds and for some the
worldview of radical Islam becomes the
infection that Fester's in these open
wounds there's an African proverb that
says if the young are not initiated into
the village they will burn it down just
to feel its warmth I would like to ask
two Muslim parents and Muslim
communities will you love and care for
your children without forcing them to
meet your expectations can you choose
them instead of your honor can you
understand why they're so angry and
alienated when you put your honour
before their happiness can you try to be
a friend to your child so that they can
trust you and want to share with you
their experiences rather than having to
seek it somewhere else and to our young
people tempted by extremism can you
acknowledge that your rage is fueled by
pain will you find the strength to
resist those cynical old men who want to
use your blood for their own profits can
you find a way to live
can you see that the sweetest revenge is
for you to live a happy full and free
life a life defined by you and nobody
else why do you want to become just
another dead Muslim kid and for the rest
of us when will we start listening to
our young people how can we support them
in redirecting their pain into something
more constructive they think we don't
like them they think we don't care what
happens to them they think we don't
accept them can we find a way to make
them feel differently what will it take
for us to see them and notice them
before they become either the victims or
the perpetrators of violence can we make
ourselves care about them and consider
them to be our own and not just be
outraged when the victims of violence
look like ourselves can we find a way to
reject hatred and heal the divisions
between us the thing is we cannot afford
to give up on each other or on our kids
even if they've given up on us we are
all in this together and in the long
term revenge and violence will not work
against extremists terrorists want us to
huddle in our houses and fear closing
our doors and our hearts they want us to
tear open more wounds in our societies
so that they can use them to spread
their infection more widely they want us
to become like them intolerant hateful
and cruel the day after the Paris
attacks a friend of mine sent this photo
of her daughter this is an white girl
and an Arab girl they're best friends
this image is the kryptonite for
extremists these two little girls with
their superpowers are showing the way
forward towards a society that we need
to build together a society that
includes and supports rather than
rejects our kids thank you for listening
[Applause]